Add doc dir for Keptn 0.16 (#1228)
keptn/keptn.github.io: content/docs/0.16.x/integrations/webhooks/_index.md

---
title: Webhook Integration
description: Learn how to integrate external tooling using Webhooks
weight: 2
keywords: [0.16.x-integration]
---

Keptn has a built-in capability, via the [Keptn webhook service](https://github.com/keptn/keptn/tree/master/webhook-service), to call external HTTP endpoints as part of sequence task orchestration. 

Webhooks allow you to easily integrate various third-party tools such as testing services, CI/CD pipelines, and incident management services. In addition to just invoking the third-party webhook receiver, webhook subscriptions can be configured to wait for the third-party webhook receiver to send back details about what it did. 

> Depending on the receiving tools configuration, data can be either passed within the payload body or as query params in the URL along with any required headers and API tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the receiving tools configuration, data can be passed either  within the payload body or as query params in the URL, along with any required headers and API tokens.
```

| Event types     | Description                                           |
|---------------- |-----------------------------------------------------  |
| Task triggered  | The task has been triggered but is not yet running.   |
| Task started    | The task has begun running.                           |
| Task finished   | The task has finished.                                |

## Webhook service subscription Types

Broadly, there are two types of webhooks:

1. *Passive* - These subscriptions just call a third-party webhook receiver and there are two variants. 
    * Subscribe to a task `started` or `finished` events. 
    * Subscribe to a task `triggered` event and the Keptn webhook service sends both the task `started` event and the task `finished` event to complete the sequence task.  
1. *Active* - These subscriptions subscribe to a task `triggered` event and the Keptn webhook service sends the task `started` event.  The sequence then waits for the third-party webhook receiver to send back a task `finished` event to complete the sequence task.

## Configure Passive on task "started" or "finished" events

> For this use case, a webhook subscription is configured to listen to a task `started` or `finished` event. For this to work, some other Keptn service is responsible to send the task `started` and `finished` events to complete the sequence task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this use case, a webhook subscription is configured to listen to a task `started` or `finished` event. For this to work, some other Keptn service must send the task `started` and `finished` events to complete the sequence task.
```

caption="Add task subscription for webhook-service"
width="700px">}}

**Step 2: Configure subscription**

In the subscription form, provide the information for the task subscription and webhook configuration: 

{{< popup_image
link="./assets/create-webhook.png"
caption="Form to create subscription and webhook configuration"
width="500px">}}

*Subscription:*

* *Task*: The task the webhook should be fired on (e.g., `test` or `deployment`)
* *Task suffix*: The state of the task when the webhook should be fired; select one of: `started`, or `finished`
* *Filter*: To restrict the webhook to certain stages and services you can specify those using filters. 

*Webhook configuration:*

* *Request method*: Choose the request method; select one of: `GET`, `POST` or `PUT`.
* *URL*: The endpoint URL is where the webhook will send the request.
* *Custom headers*: You can use the custom headers field to add HTTP headers to the request, such as unique identifiers or authentication credentials.
* *Proxy*: If required, you can specify a proxy the request has to go through.

*Important Notes:* 

* Many APIs require `Content-Type: application/json` so be sure to add this as a custom header. 

> * Webhook subscriptions are stored in clear text within the upstream Git repo, so be sure to store tokens or other secret data as Keptn secrets. Details on creating and using secrets this is [described below](#include-sensitive-data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Webhook subscriptions are stored in clear text within the upstream Git repo, so be sure to store tokens or other secret data as Keptn secrets. Details on creating and using secrets are [described below](#include-sensitive-data).
```

{{< popup_image
link="./assets/header-secret.png"
caption="Example webhook with API token as a secret and Content-Type header"
width="500px">}}

**Step 3: Custom payload**

If the third-party webhook receiver requires this, add a payload to match the format requested by the receiving endpoint.

> The output format of the webhook (i.e., the payload of the request body) can be customized using event data to match the required input format of the tool you are integrating with. Therefore, you can reference the data field (event property) using [Go templating](https://blog.gopheracademy.com/advent-2017/using-go-templates/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output format of the webhook (i.e., the payload of the request body) can be customized using event data to match the required input format of the tool with which you are integrating. Therefore, you can reference the data field (event property) using [Go templating](https://blog.gopheracademy.com/advent-2017/using-go-templates/). 
```

For example, if you would like to get the value of the `project` property from the subscribed event, type in: `{{.data.project}}`. A look at the example event can help to identify the proper data field. 

*An example of a customized request payload:*   

```
{
  "text": "Evaluation in {{.data.stage}} finished with result {{.data.evaluation.result}} and score {{.data.evaluation.score}}."
}
```

Based on the Go templating capabilities, you can: 

* Define conditions: `"{{if .fieldName}}{{.fieldName}}{{ else }}No field name set{{ end }}"` 
* Access an array element: `"{{ index .articles.Content 0 }}"`
* Refer to attributes with non-string characters `"(index .data "incident-management-tool").url"`

*An example of a customized request payload using a condition on an array element:*

```
{
  "deploymentURL": "{{if index .data.deployment.deploymentURIsPublic 0}}{{index .data.deployment.deploymentURIsPublic 0}}{{else}}No deployment URL provided{{end}}"
}
```

A convenient way to add event properties to the URL or custom payload is the property picker. 

> To use this, put your cursor in the URL or text field at the spot where you would like to customize the payload. Clicking the *computer* icon will open a list of data fields you can add to the payload or URL. This list of data fields is derived from the event your webhook is subscribed to. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this, put your cursor in the URL or text field at the spot where you would like to customize the payload. Clicking the *computer* icon opens a list of data fields you can add to the payload or URL. This list of data fields is derived from the event to which your webhook is subscribed. 
```

{{< popup_image
link="./assets/customize-payload.png"
caption="Select event data to add to the payload or URL"
width="700px">}}

**Step 4: Set "Send Finished Event" flag**

The `Send finished` event flag is not applicable to a *passive* webhook. So you can leave it unselected as shown below.

{{< popup_image
link="./assets/finished-event-empty.png"
caption="Configure"
width="400px">}}

**Step 5: Create subscription**

Click the **Create subscription** button to save and enable the webhook for your integration.

## Configure Passive on task "triggered" events

For this use case, the Keptn webhook service sends both the task `started` and task `finished` events to complete the task sequence. 

An example *Passive* webhook is setting a feature flag where the Third-party webhook receiver can't send confirmation that it set the flag.

**Add subscription**

1. Follow the same steps above to add a new webhook subscription, but configure it to listen to a Task suffix of `triggered`. 

> 1. Ensure that the `Automatically` option is selected as shown below. When this is set, the webhook service will automatically send the task `finished` event for your subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Ensure that the `Automatically` option is selected as shown below. When this is set, the webhook service automatically sends the task `finished` event for your subscription.
```

    {{< popup_image
    link="./assets/finished-event-auto.png"
    caption="Configure"
    width="400px">}}

1. Click the **Create subscription** button to save and enable the webhook for your integration.

## Configure Active webhook on task "triggered" events

> This type is called *Active* because the Keptn webhook service will first send the task `started` event and the third-party webhook receiver sends back the `finished` task event to complete the task sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This type is called *Active* because the Keptn webhook service first sends the task `started` event and the third-party webhook receiver sends back the `finished` task event to complete the task sequence.
```

An example *Active* webhook is to trigger a system to open an incident management ticket and send back the newly created incident ticket number within the task `finished` event so that the sequence can continue.

*Important Note:* 

> * If the third-party webhook receiver does NOT send back the task `finished` event, the sequence will remain in a waiting state and will not continue until it times out or it receives the task `finished` event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the third-party webhook receiver does NOT send back the task `finished` event, the sequence remains in a waiting state and does not continue until it times out or it receives the task `finished` event.
```

**Step 1: Add subscription**

1. Follow the same steps above to add a new webhook subscription, but configure it to listen to a Task suffix of `triggered`  
1. The custom payload should include the following data in order for the receiving tool to properly respond with a `finished` event:
  * `{{.id}}` - required in the `triggeredid` attribute of the `finished` event
  * `{{.shkeptncontext}}` - required in the `shkeptncontext` attribute of the `finished` event
  * Optional, but depends on your implementation: `{{.data.project}}`, `{{.data.service}}`, `{{.data.stage}}`
1. Follow the same steps above to add a new webhook subscription, but configure it to listen to a Task suffix of `triggered`. 

> 1. Ensure that the `By webhook receiver` option is selected as shown below. When this is set, the webhook service will expect the webhook receiver to send back the task `finished` event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Ensure that the `By webhook receiver` option is selected as shown below. When this is set, the webhook service expects the webhook receiver to send back the task `finished` event.
```

        "customKey2":"customData2"
      } 
    },
    "source": "keptn-project",
    "specversion": "1.0",
    "type": "sh.keptn.event.[REPLACE WITH YOUR TASK NAME].finished",
    "shkeptncontext": "REPLACE WITH SHKEPTNCONTEXT FROM THE TRIGGERED EVENT",
    "triggeredid": "REPLACE WITH ID FROM THE TRIGGERED EVENT"
  }
  ```

## Delete a Webhook

To delete a webhook integration, click on the *trash can* icon next to the subscription. Note that deleting a webhook is permanent and cannot be reversed. Once deleted, Keptn will no longer send requests to the endpoint.

{{< popup_image
link="./assets/delete-webhook.png"
caption="Delete a webhook"
width="700px">}}

*Important Note:* 

* Deleting a webhook means that the subscription in Uniform is deleted, as well as the webhook configuration file within the upstream Git repo.

## Include sensitive data

When integrating tools by calling their endpoints, many times authentication is needed. This is done by storing an authentication token that is part of the webhook request. Since Webhook subscriptions are stored in clear text within the upstream Git repo, so be sure to store tokens or other secret data as Keptn secrets as follows: 

> * Create a secret with a unique `name`, secret scope set to `keptn-webhook-service`, and a `key:value` pair whereas the key is a unique identifier of your secret and the value holds the sensitive data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create a secret with a unique `name`, secret scope set to `keptn-webhook-service`, and a `key:value` pair where the key is a unique identifier of your secret and the value holds the sensitive data.
```

  {{< popup_image
  link="./assets/create-secret.png"
  caption="Create a secret for webhook-service"
  width="700px">}}

> * When configuring your webhook, you can reference the sensitive data as part of the *URL*, *Custom header*, and in the *Custom payload*. Therefore, click the *key* icon that opens the list of available secrets. Select your secret and specify the key that refers to the sensitive data you would like to include at this point and the key-value pair will be automatically inserted into the selected field in the format `{{.secret.name.key}}`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When configuring your webhook, you can reference the sensitive data as part of the *URL*, *Custom header*, and in the *Custom payload*. Therefore, click the *key* icon that opens the list of available secrets. Select your secret and specify the key that refers to the sensitive data you would like to include at this point and the key-value pair is  automatically inserted into the selected field in the format `{{.secret.name.key}}`. 
```
